GOVERNMENT OF GHANA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
POLICY

Front Cover Photo Credits: Fairphone, 2014 ; John O’Bryan, 2015 and Erik (HASH) Hersman, 2008
Back Cover Photo Credit: John O’Bryan, 2015

Government of Ghana
Ministry of Finance
Digital Financial Services Policy
Photo Credit: John O’Bryan, 2015

Foreword
Globalization and digitization are two major trends that will shape the future of nations. Despite the
many challenges associated with adapting to increasingly globalized markets and rapidly changing
technologies, Ghana is well-positioned to take advantage of these two trends as it strives to create a
vibrant economy that benefits all Ghanaians.
The Government of Ghana has identified financial inclusion as a key pillar of efforts to developing
its digital economy. Recognizing the importance of access to relevant and affordable financial
services for all citizens, the Ministry of Finance led the development of the National Financial Inclusion
and Development Strategy (NFIDS), which outlines Ghana’s approach to, and specifies targets for
improving financial inclusion. Given the importance of digital financial services to both furthering
financial inclusion and laying the groundwork for Ghana’s digital economy of the future, the Ministry
of Finance has complemented the NFIDS with a Digital Financial Services (DFS) Policy, designed to
serve as a blueprint for how Ghana can leverage digital finance to achieve its financial inclusion goals.
Covering a four-year time period and six thematic areas, the DFS Policy clearly outlines the steps
Government and industry can take to bolster the country’s DFS ecosystem.
The 43 short- and medium-term action points in the Policy provide clear and consistent guidance for
all stakeholders in both the public and private sectors to work together to realize a shared goal of
robust digital inclusion. When implemented, it is expected that these policy actions would enhance the
governance of the DFS ecosystem; create a regulatory framework that supports innovation, competition
and financial inclusion; strengthen the monitoring capacity of regulators; enhance the utility of digital
infrastructure; prioritize the digitization of digital use cases and consequently support the emergence
and growth of FinTechs.
The DFS Policy is the result of a collaborative effort of stakeholders from Government, industry and
international partners, all under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance. This type of collaboration
will also be critical over the long-term, as the Ministry of Finance continues to work with a range of
stakeholders to implement the DFS Policy and achieve the goals outlined in the NFIDS.
I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate the officials of the Financial Sector Division of
the Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Communications (MoC), Bank of Ghana (BOG), National
Insurance Commission (NIC), National Pensions Regulatory Authority (NPRA), Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), the Swiss Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), the Consultative
Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), the FinTech Chamber, Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) and all
other stakeholders whose contributions resulted in the development of the DFS policy.
Ken Ofori-Atta
Minister
Ministry of Finance
Table of Contents
Glossary 7
Executive Summary 9
Preamble: A snapshot of Ghana in 2023 10
Introduction 15
Vision for DFS (2020-2023) 17
Monitoring and Evaluation 23
DFS Policy Pillars 25
ACTION AREA 1: Governance 27
ACTION AREA 2: Enabling regulation 29
ACTION AREA 3: Capacity Building 34
ACTION AREA 4: Market infrastructure 38
ACTION AREA 5: Digital payment use cases 42
ACTION AREA 6: Support FinTech 48
ANNEX 1: Timeline of Action Points 51
ANNEX 2: NFIDS targets applicable to DFS Policy 55
Photo Credit: John O’Bryan, 2015

Glossary
AML – Anti-Money Laundering
API – Application Programming Interface
B2G – Business to Government
BoG – Bank of Ghana
BTCA – Better than Cash Alliance
CFT – Counter Financing of Terrorism
COCOBOD – Ghana Cocoa Board
DFS – Digital Financial Services
DPC – Data Protection Commission
EFT – Electronic Funds Transfer
EMI – Electronic Money Issuer
FATF – Financial Action Task Force
FinTech – Financial Technology
FMCG – Fast Moving Consumer Goods
FSP – Financial Services Providers
G2B – Government to Business
G2P – Government to Person
GEPP – Ghana e-Payment Portal
GhIPSS – Ghana Interbank Payment and Settlement Systems
GIFEC – Ghana Investment Fund for Electronic Communications
GRA – Ghana Revenue Authority
GSM – Global System for Mobile Communications
InsurTech – Insurance Technology
LBC – Licensed Buying Companies
KYC – Know-Your-Customer
MDAs – Ministries, Departments, Agencies
MoF – Ministry of Finance
MOU – Memorandum of Understanding
MNO – Mobile Network Operator
NEIP – National Entrepreneurship and Innovation Plan
NFC – Near-field Communication
NFIDS – National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
NHIS – National Health Insurance Scheme
NIC – National Insurance Commission
NITA – National Information Technology Agency
NPRA – National Pensions Regulatory Authority
NPS – National Payments Strategy
P2G– Person to Government
PAYG – Pay as you go
POS – Point of Sale
PSSA – Payment Systems and Services Act
QR – Quick Response
RegTech – Regulatory Technology
SIM – Subscriber Identification Module
USSD – Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
VAT – Value Added Tax
Executive Summary
Improved internet connectivity, ubiquitous mobile technology, advanced computing techniques, data
portability, the advent of artificial intelligence - technological advances such as these are ushering in
a new era of digital financial services (DFS) in Ghana.
These technologies are enabling banks and microfinance institutions to reinvent their business models
while making it possible for new types of providers to enter the market. Telecommunications operators
have already taken the country’s payments infrastructure into the twenty-first century, and riding on
top of these digital rails, e-commerce is expected to grow rapidly. Financial technology (FinTech) is
poised to revolutionize product design, delivery and user experience of financial services. Over the
next decade, Ghana’s retail and wholesale DFS providers are likely to mature into highly automated,
interactive market players in an increasingly modularized ecosystem.
Through this policy, the Government of Ghana seeks to build on these advances to create a resilient,
inclusive and innovative DFS ecosystem that contributes to social development and a robust economy
with a thriving private sector. The Government envisions that by 2023:
• All Ghanaians will have access to a broad range of suitable and affordable digital
financial services – including payment, credit, savings, insurance, and investment.
• Businesses and Government will have achieved greater transparency and efficiency
to contribute to the economic growth of the nation.
• Payment flows would be digitized and formalised, thereby shrinking the informal
economy, increasing Government revenues, and making monetary policies more
effective.
To achieve these goals, the Government is committed to fostering an open and level ecosystem
that welcomes these new entrants, embraces technology, and protects users. Financial stability,
integrity and inclusion will increase thereby mitigating emerging risks. A growing digital financial
sector requires regulators and supervisors to develop regulation that is technology-neutral, device-
agnostic, principles-based, and proportional to risk, creating a level playing field for all players. It also
requires sufficient technical and supervisory capacity and a clear governance structure to ensure
appropriate implementation of regulation. In this context, there is an opportunity to embrace regulatory
technology (RegTech)1 and harness the power of data and technology to strengthen market oversight
and customer recourse.
We, the Government of Ghana, are collectively responsible for creating a policy environment that
allows businesses to innovate and thrive.Moreover, we can drive the digitization of the economy by
adopting electronic payments and supporting specific digital payment use cases. We recognize that
payment connectivity is more than a tool to digitize the Government’s existing payment flows and
that digital payments can evolve into a far-reaching platform for strengthening energy policy, food
security, government transparency, and other core policies. Further, we can put in place policies
that incentivize specific DFS, such as responsible digital credit, savings and insurance services, to
improve the financial lives of citizens.
This policy, which establishes a Four-year money issuers (EMIs), social media plat
roadmap (2020-2023), thereby identifies six forms) and other appropriately regulated
areas for action: DFS stakeholders
2.7 Introduce a national competition law and
1. Governance authority
Enhance governance of the DFS ecosystem. 3. Capacity building
Action items are:
Strengthen the capacity of the Ghanaian
a. Strive for improved forms of dialogue authorities to monitor the financial sector on
between industry and the relevant matters concerning market conduct, competition
regulators and supervisors, and within and data protection, leveraging new technologies
the Government of Ghana itself and architectures for data sharing (RegTech).
1.2. Establish a digital task force in the The action items are:
Ministry of Finance focused on DFS
3.1 Ensure that BoG and other financial
2. Enabling regulation regulators have sufficient capacity and
resources to effectively supervise the
Create a regulatory framework that supports DFS space, particularly with competition
innovation, competition, and financial inclusion. matters
The action items are: 3.2 Require all DFS providers to submit
compliance reports digitally
2.1 Implement the Payment Systems and 3.3 Increase the technical capacity of the
Services Act and issue clarifying Data Protection Commission in regard to
regulations DFS data, facilitate its cooperation with
2.2 Expand the risk-based approach to KYC financial supervisors and evaluate the
to all basic transaction accounts in an need for additional measures with
equivalent manner regard to alternative DFS data
2.3 Strengthen and fully implement the 3.4 Design a RegTech strategy across
Consumer Recourse Guidelines and the regulators
Disclosure Rules for Credit Products
and create a strategy for a consumer 4. Market infrastructure
protection framework for financial
services Develop a purpose-built infrastructure for DFS
2.4 Ensure deposit protection over individual and strengthen existing payment platforms
e-money accounts where feasible. The action items are:
2.5 Introduce interventions to stimulate the
uptake digital insurance services 4.1 Establish the biometric centralized
2.6 Introduce a data-sharing regulation National ID system and enable
between data controllers (banks, mobile payments and other use cases
network operators (MNOs), electronic though e-KYC
4.2 Upgrade the Ghana E-Payment Portal 5.3 Support the digitization of public utility
(GEPP) platform’s payment and service payments
capability, through the digital 5.4 Digitize pension contributions and
automation of forms and processes, the distributions for the informal sector
development of USSD and app-based 5.5 Digitize NHIS premiums and their
access for certain services, the creation payment on a monthly basis
of open APIs and the re-engineering of 5.6 Authorize receipt and payment of
current internal processes international remittances directly
4.3 Ensure effective interoperability between by e-money issuers
bank and mobile payments, including 5.7 Support the digitization of agriculture
the development of a clear and neutral value chain payments
governance structure for the integration 5.8 Subsidize the purchase and installation
of mobile payments into the national of homogeneous smart meters for
switch electricity and water
4.4 Complete a diagnostic of Ghana’s 5.9 Roll-out end-to-end digital delivery of
payments infrastructure to assess Government services
missing elements of a digital
infrastructure stack and develop an 6. Support FinTech
implementation strategy. This has
already begun and should run its natural Support the growth of FinTech firms by creating
course, culminating in the Government of incentives that encourage investments and the
Ghana committing to implementing one launch of new business models and products.
of the presented scenarios for DFS The action items are:
infrastructure optimization
4.5 Monitor the coverage levels of cash-in/ 6.1 Undertake an assessment of the policy
cash-out networks and explore potential environment in place for FinTech firms
models for encouraging their expansion and investors
to underserved areas 6.2 Assess the need and feasibility of a
4.6 Implement a digital financial regulatory sandbox for FinTech products
infrastructure stack through the creation 6.3 Provide direct Government support for
of a virtual payment addressing system, FinTech entrepreneurship
a payment bridge and a governance 6.4 Privilege FinTech-based payment
structure solutions for Government-to-Person and
Government to Business payments
5. Digital payment use cases
Within these six action areas, the policy maps
Prioritize the digitization of payment use out forty-three actions that are aligned with the
cases such as small-value informal pensions, priorities that the Government laid out in the
government payments, remittances, merchant National Payments Strategy (NPS) 2014-2019
payments, and utility payments, leveraging and in the draft National Financial Inclusion and
technologies to improve design, delivery and Development Strategy (NFIDS) 2017-2023. The
monitoring. The action items are: actions are further informed by an assessment of
the Ghanaian financial sector, the needs of local
5.1 Support the digitization of small-value financial service providers and customers, and
Person-to-Government (P2G) payments international best practices. Target indicators
5.2 Incentivize and support digital payments have been identified to ensure that key action
in the retail space points equally translate into tangible progress
towards a resilient, inclusive and innovative DFS as Electronic Money Issuers (EMIs or
ecosystem. With these six pillars and the specific Dedicated-EMIs) provide mobile money
actions recommended within each category, the wallets, P2P transactions and bill and
goal is for a Ghana’s financial services landscape merchant payments, and partner with
to exhibit the following features by 2023: a variety of ecosystem players to offer
more sophisticated products such as
• A holistic digital payment ecosystem micro-insurance and digital credit. These
for goods and services: offerings are complemented by new,
Individuals can pay for most goods or white-label retail products from existing
services simply by providing their national insurance providers or new InsurTech
ID number with a biometric check or using entrants, serving untapped markets. The
a contactless NFC-enabled national ID current handful of FinTech firms have
card. The number of retail merchants expanded their offerings to international
accepting digital payments has remittances, digital investments and
significantly increased with the gradual digital budgeting tools, leveraging access
roll-out of a digital payment infrastructure to users’ data they can now collect from
“stack” combined with government tax MNOs, EMIs, banks, and social media
incentives. Pre-paid public utilities are platforms. Thanks to expanded access to
paid via mobile money through pay-as- users’ data (based on customer consent),
you-go (PAYG) systems connected to they are joined by dozens of new start-
smart meters. Individuals can recharge ups, offering either specific innovative
their electricity meters from the comfort products such as robo-investing
of their own homes, while others can pay services and financial health building
their post-paid water bill without traveling services or a whole range of competing
to and queuing at a public utility cash digital products for credit, savings,
point. Even informal vendors such as insurance, and PAYG payment products
street hawkers are able to accept mobile that are more affordable, tailored and
money through QR codes or NFC-enabled relevant to the needs of the mass market,
USSD phones. including underserved populations. In
this increasingly competitive landscape,
• Digitized pension payments for all: the prices of financial services have
Government pension payments to decreased, rendering them affordable
both formal and informal workers, civil and desirable for all Ghanaians.
servant salaries and social transfers
continue to be paid digitally, but rather • Digitized records for citizens (creation,
than being immediately cashed out, this retrieval and archiving): The Ghana
digital value remains in the ecosystem ePayment Portal (GEPP) platform
as the opportunities to pay digitally are or similar consolidated government
convenient and attractive. payment portals can offer end-to-end
digital ordering and delivery of the most
• Digital payment channels maximized common government services, such as
by financial services providers: renewal of drivers’ licences or copies of
Banks have reimagined the customer birth certificates. Citizens can just log onto
journey with services offered evolving the GEPP portal via their mobile phone or
from multi-channel to omni-channel, at an internet cafe, and with their unique
focusing on highly personalized ID number and a digital photo, order and
customer experiences. Non-banks such pay for a passport renewal, which can
be collected in-person with biometric adults hold a biometric, contactless,
verification. Services that do not require NFC-enabled national ID card and
any digital upload, such as ordering a an ID number. A virtual simplified
copy of a marriage certificate, may even payment addressing system, which
be available on a USSD phone, and the links a citizen’s bank account to a virtual
certificate can be delivered directly by payment address such as the national
the postal service or uploaded to the ID number or phone number, has been
individual’s digital locker. rolled out, a digital locker for storage of
individual data is in a pilot stage, and
• Seamless connectivity between government institutions can already
government and private institutions: safely exchange necessary data. This
Behind the scenes, all major financial would mean that almost all the elements
service providers and FinTech firms have of a digital payment infrastructure stack
connected to the national switch and namely biometric ID, digital addressing
have agreed to a governance scheme and an interoperable switch have been
and operational and commercial rules put into place.
that allow seamless interoperate. All
Photo Credit: Chris Burns, 2015

Photo Credit: Development UEA, 2012

Introduction
This policy sets out a vision for a resilient, inclusive and innovative DFS ecosystem in Ghana. Specifically
the policy envisions that by 2023:
I. All Ghanaians have access to a large and broad range of quality and affordable
digital financial services – including payment, credit, savings, insurance, and
investment – that meet their needs;
II. Businesses and Government have achieved greater transparency and efficiency to
contribute to the economic growth of the nation;
III. Payment flows have been digitized and formalised, thereby shrinking the informal
economy, increasing Government revenues, and making monetary policies more
effective.
In this policy, the Government of Ghana plays the following three roles: (1) a policy enabler for DFS, (2)
a driver and user of DFS products, and (3) a beneficiary of DFS through cost savings, revenue increase
and monetary policy transmission. The Government thus has multiple touch points and levers in the
DFS ecosystem, and this Policy recognizes the importance of all these roles towards the achievement
of this vision. This Policy is aligned with the priorities that the Government laid out in the National
Payments Strategy (NPS) 2014-2019 and in the National Financial Inclusion and Development Strategy
(NFIDS) 2017-2023:
• The NPS provides a strategic roadmap for payments aimed at reducing cash
dependency and increasing financial inclusion.
• The NFIDS’ overall objective is to increase financial inclusion from 58% to 75% by
2023. The NFIDS articulates five priority areas for financial sector development:
(i) Financial stability; (ii) Access, quality, and usage of financial services; (iii) Financial
infrastructure; (iv) Financial consumer protection; and (v) Financial literacy and
capability. This policy complements the NFIDS by outlining a vision for how DFS can
meaningfully contribute to Ghana’s financial inclusion goals.
The DFS Policy establishes a 4-year (2020-2023) roadmap, agreed and defined at the national level,
that is informed by an assessment of the Ghanaian financial sector, the needs of local financial service
providers and customers, and international best practices. Many of the baseline indicators for this
Policy’s targets stem from data gathered and analysed in a 2017 country digital payment diagnostic2
undertaken by the Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA) in partnership with the Ministry of Finance. The
goals of this policy are laid out in detail throughout this document.
Applying a gender lens to the implementation of 3. Engage local communities to grasp
this policy will be critical to advancing women’s women’s wants and needs for DFS across
financial inclusion, whose access to and use of profiles and livelihoods (e.g. rural, urban,
financial services continues to lag behind that agriculture, commence, informal sector,
of men. In general, this means that the following etc);
gender lens considerations should be front
and centre as the public and private sector 4. Monitor all actions taken in line with
aims towards the implementation of this policy. this policy to understand their impact
Specifically, all stakeholders should: on gender, and keenly seek to document
and address any unintended
1. Understand the market dynamics from a consequences;
gender perspective, utilising existing data
and collecting new data where possible 5. Explain and advocate the business case
on those dynamics so that this data can for serving women well and promote
be used proactively to reduce the gap those messages so that they translate into
between financial inclusion levels for men financial services that are more appropriate
and women; for women; and
2. Consider the normative barriers that 6. Leverage online and in-person resources
affect women’s opportunities to access such as FinEquity - the CGAP facilitated
and use DFS and how this and other community of practice focused exclusively
relevant policies might exacerbate or on women’s financial inclusion - to ensure
reduce these barriers; best global practices are followed.
Photo Credit: Buddy Buruku, 2020

Vision For DFS (2020-2023)
Build a DFS ecosystem for the 21st century that drives economic growth,
social development, opportunity, and resilience for Ghana and its citizens.
The vision that inspires this policy is anchored in the benefits that the digitization of financial services
brings to Ghana’s citizens, businesses, and the economy.
The shift from a cash to a digital economy will increase convenience, security and ease of use for
citizens and cater to Ghanaians in both the urban and the rural areas. DFS will increasingly provide
citizens with greater choice and lower prices for financial services, such as digital remittances and
credit that are available at the fingertips; waiting long hours to perform these financial transactions and
travelling long distances with cash in hand will become obsolete. In addition, DFS offers citizens the
opportunity to access new, innovative products that are more suitable to their needs. Access to DFS
also has significant potential to improve the livelihoods of women and citizens in rural areas since both
are very active in the informal economy and financially excluded.
Moreover, the adoption of DFS strengthens businesses by opening transformative new pathways for
access to capital for micro, small, and medium enterprises. Similarly, access to innovative digital
insurance products can enable businesses to secure themselves from unforeseen events. Further, the
formalization of many businesses will benefit both employees (greater access to social protection) and
customers (increased protection).
Our economy will benefit from a shift to DFS as payments will become cheaper, quicker and more
secure, thereby increasing the volume and value of transactions conducted in the formal economy.
As more people get access to a broader range of higher quality financial services, they can start new
companies, invest in themselves or their businesses, seize opportunities and protect themselves from
risks or shocks. This will boost entrepreneurship, increase growth and provide a more stable economic
environment.
The shift towards a DFS ecosystem will help equally strengthen Government finances through improved
revenue collection and decreased leakages, thus augmenting our budgetary capacity. For example
in Uganda, the Kampala Capital City Authority, which has been automating its local tax collection
since 2014 through online and mobile money payment systems, has seen a 167% increase in revenue
collection over 4 years.3 In India, linking cash transfers for food and fuel subsidies to the Aadhaar
digital payment infrastructure stack has saved the Indian government US$4.7 billion in 4 years4 from
diminished leakages and elimination of ghost beneficiaries while the stack overall has resulted in total
savings of US$ 9 -10 billion.5
Further, the adoption of DFS will help reduce already transformed the payments space, and
both administrative and transaction costs to e-commerce is expected to grow rapidly. FinTech9
the Government as well as monetary policy has the potential to revolutionize product design
transmission lags to the real economy, thereby and delivery, and the user experience. In some
enhancing Bank of Ghana’s ability to achieve countries, super-platforms such as Facebook,
growth and stability for all Ghanaians. For Google and Alibaba are making significant
example, in Mexico the government’s shift to investments to enter the financial marketplace,
digital payments (which began in 1997) reduced in addition to providing free internet access.
its spending on wages, pensions, and social Over the next ten years, our retail and wholesale
welfare by 3.3 percent annually, or nearly US$ DFS providers will mature into highly automated
1.3 billion,6 while the Brazilian Government’s and interactive market players in an increasingly
Bolsa Família program reduced its transaction modularized ecosystem.
costs from 14.7 percent of total payments to 2.6
percent when it consolidated several benefits The Government of Ghana is committed to
onto a single e-payment card.7 fostering an open and level ecosystem that
welcomes new entrants, embraces technology,
With these benefits in mind, our goal for this Policy and protects users, while concurrently increasing
is to drive financial inclusion by increasing both financial stability, integrity and inclusion in order
the depth (i.e., the number of formal financial to mitigate emerging risks. A growing, digital-
services used by each individual and frequency led, financial sector requires our regulators
of the transactions), and breadth (i.e., the range and supervisors equally to develop regulation
of services available to customers, the quality of that is technology-neutral and device-agnostic,
their experience and how it caters to their health, principles-based and proportional to risk,
housing, education, and sanitation needs) of creating a level playing field for all players. In
their everyday financial lives. this context, there is an opportunity to embrace
regulatory technology (RegTech) and harness
To achieve these goals, the DFS market must be the power of data and technology to strengthen
competitive, and thus embrace the potential of market oversight and customer recourse.
new products and business models developed
by incumbents and new entrants, such as FinTech We, the Government of Ghana, are as a whole
firms and MNOs. Between 2010 and 2015 responsible for creating a policy environment
mobile money was the main driver in increasing that allows businesses to thrive and innovation to
the formal financial inclusion (i.e., the number spur. Moreover, we can drive the digitization of
of adults using at least one formal financial the economy by adopting electronic payments
service) from 41% to 58%,8 and innovation will and supporting specific digital payment use
continue to be the key driver for change in the cases. In fact, payment connectivity is more
decade ahead of us. The future promises to than a narrow tool to digitize a government’s
deliver an even more rapidly changing financial existing payment flows, since it can evolve into
sector. Improved connectivity, ubiquitous a far-reaching platform for strengthening energy
mobile technology, advanced computing policy, food security, government transparency,
techniques, data portability and the advent of and other core policies.
artificial intelligence are thoroughly changing its
shape. Technological advancements provide However, we cannot undertake this journey
new opportunities for banks and microfinance alone. Industry-wide collaboration between the
institutions to reinvent their business models, and public and private sector will be critically needed
for emerging alternative providers to enter these to develop and implement a transformational
markets. Telecommunications operators have road map that creates a sound, inclusive and
innovative DFS ecosystem, making sure that no noted that the NFIDS also contains relevant
Ghanaian is left behind. indicators, details of which are available in Annex
2. Also apart from digital payments and digital
Targets credit, no baseline data exists for the other types
of DFS, and thus there are no specific indicators
The following targets are derived from the 2017 for these products. We therefore have instead
BTCA country diagnostic, Bank of Ghana and focused on access to the general financial
GhIPSS data and other industry sources. They services product, with the target being overall
have been identified to ensure that key action increase in access.
points detailed in this Policy translate into
tangible progress towards a resilient, inclusive
and innovative DFS ecosystem. It should be
INDICATORS FOR OVERALL ECOSYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
CATEGORY INDICATORS 2016 2020
DIGITIZATION OF Currency outside banks to M1 ratio 39.96%10 30%
PAYMENTS
Total volume of mobile money transactions (millions) 100.4
Total number of POS terminals in circulation 6,500
Total volume of POS transactions (millions) 6.7
Total volume of issued credit and debit cards (millions) 5.455
Total volume of credit and debit card transactions (millions) 46.6
Number of registered mobile banking users (millions) 2.176
DIGITIZATION OF Total volume of mobile banking transactions (millions) 6.8
PAYMENTS
Number of registered internet banking users (millions) .96
Total volume of internet banking transactions (millions) 2.7
INFRASTRUCTURE National biometric IDs issued to adult population (%) <1% 90%
Number of digital transactions on GEPP (absolute volume)
Number of transactions through national switch (million) 2.067
Value of transactions through national switch (GHS million) 447,041,343
Number of FSPs connecting to national switch 36
Source: Bank of Ghana and GhIPSS data
INDICATORS FOR SPECIFIC FINANCIAL SERVICE PRODUCTS
CATEGORY INDICATORS 2017 2020
OTHER Micro-insurance (number of lives and assets covered, 7.511 10
FINANCIAL
in millions)
SERVICE
PRODUCTS
Savings12 (% of households) 67%13 85%
Investment14 (% of households) 40% 15 52%
Digital credit (number of unique users, millions) .25 16 10
Source: The Landscape of Micro-insurance in Ghana 2015, Financial Inclusion Insights National Survey 2014, and industry
data for digital credit
INDICATORS FROM COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC
CATEGORY INDICATORS 2016 2020
DIGITIZATION Digital payments as a % of overall payments (volume) 1% 15%
OF PAYMENTS
Digital payments as a % of overall payments (value) 37% 42%
Digital Government payments made as a % of all 23% 42%
Government payments made (volume)
Digital Government payments made as a % of all 86% 89.5%
Government payments made (value)
Digital business payments as a % of all business payments 28% 33.5%
(volume)
Digital business payments as a % of all business payments 35% 39%
(value)
DIGITIZATION Digital individual payments as a % of all individual payments 0.4% 5.3%
OF PAYMENTS
(volume)
Digital individual payments as a % of all individual payments 29% 34%
(value)
Source: 2017 BTCA country diagnostic. These indicators can only be verified in 2020, as they will require a second
diagnostic
OTHER RECOMMENDED INDICATORS
Several indicators have been identified which would help monitor progress towards a
resilient, inclusive and innovative DFS ecosystem, but for which there is no baseline
data. A study should be undertaken to determine these baseline indicators.
• Digital insurance: Volume and value of insurance purchased via a digital
channel.
• Digital savings: Volume and value of savings stored via a digital channel.
• Digital credit: Value of loans obtained via a digital channel.
• Digital investments: Volume and value of investments purchased via a digital
channel.
• Digital pensions: Volume and value of pensions contributions and pension
payments received via a digital channel.
• Gender: Gender split for digital payments, broken down by digital payment
instrument.
• Cost: Average cost to user for a digital transaction, broken down by digital
payment instrument.
• Proximity: % of adults within 5km of a DFS cash-in/cash-out point.
Photo Credit: Jonathan Ernst, 2006

Monitoring and Evaluation
Based on the targets outlined in the country diagnostic, the NFIDS, and drawing on reliable data to be
mined from current and future sources (both primary and secondary in nature), monitoring and evaluation
of Ghana’s progress should be undertaken on a consistent basis. The interval of the evaluation, the
tools for measurement, and recommended interventions to be taken if any targets are not met, should
be determined by a multi-stakeholder team anchored within the proposed governance structure for
implementing this DFS Policy. The monitoring and evaluation should rely heavily on information from
the various regulatory authorities, as well as private sector who may be able to provide insight into DFS
product and service development, reach and uptake.
There is also need for a formal coordination mechanism to engage all the various public, private and
development partner DFS initiatives all being implemented in Ghana. All these initiatives fall under what
is the Financial Sector/Revenue Generation thematic area of the Ghana Digital Roadmap (Theme 7)
recently launched by the Office of the Vice President and the Ministry of Communications. Specifically,
this theme has the following areas of focus:
A. How technology can drive better policy outcomes – one that benefits citizens /
organizations and can be tied directly to all government revenue streams (levies,
taxes, duties, fees, penalties, etc.);
B. How technology can drive a better cash flow management – one that provides
visibility into inflows and outflows and also makes it easy to allocate funding to
priority areas;
C. How FinTechs can help facilitate financial transactions and relationships; and
D. Electronic Transactions
In pursuing the goals of the Ghana Digital Roadmap and the NFIDS, several DFS initiatives have begun
in partnership with various government institutions. However, the sprawl of such initiatives without a
coordination plan may have created some level of duplication, hampered progress and may result in
a sub-optimal outcome.
It is for this reason that there is a need for a central coordinating mechanism at the highest level of
government, to ensure alignment of the different stakeholders, commitment to the process, visibility
and efficient use of government/donor resources. This mechanism should constitute a working group
from government, technology/banking/FinTech chambers and independent subject matter experts.
Development partners implementing and/or funding work in DFS should also have a role in this group
in an advisory capacity.
Photo Credit: John O’Bryan/ USAID
Photo Credit: C.C. Chapman, 2012

DFS Policy Pillars
In order to achieve these targets, the DFS policy identifies six pillars for action:
1. Governance
Enhance governance of the DFS ecosystem.
2. Enabling regulation
Create a regulatory framework that supports innovation, competition, and financial inclusion.
3. Capacity building
Strengthen the capacity of the Ghanaian authorities to monitor the financial sector on matters
concerning market conduct, competition and data protection, leveraging new technologies and
architectures for data sharing (RegTech).
4. Market infrastructure
Develop a purpose-built infrastructure for DFS and strengthen existing payment platforms
where feasible.
5. Digital payment use cases
Prioritize the digitization of payment use cases such as small-value informal pensions,
government payments, remittances, merchant payments, and utility payments, leveraging
technologies to improve design, delivery and monitoring.
6. Support FinTech
Support the growth of FinTech firms by creating incentives that encourage investments and the
launch of new business models and products.
For each of the six action areas, the following action points will be implemented in the short, medium and
long-term in order to achieve the targets:
Photo Credit: Buddy Buruku, 2020

ACTION AREA 1: Governance Further, Memorandums of Understanding
(MOUs) should be entered into by the
To ensure that this Policy can be properly various DFS regulators for each of the
implemented by the financial sector regulators, products to encourage formal exchange and
the following actions are prerequisites: assistance between regulators and to clearly
delimitate jurisdiction. The appointment of a
1.1. Strive for improved forms of dialogue lead regulator per product to act as the main
between industry and the relevant regulators interface and contact point for the regulated
and supervisors, and within the Government stakeholders should be a crucial element of
of Ghana itself these MOUs.
Given the pace of change in the digital As all DFS require telecommunications
financial services space, it is important that connectivity, the expansion of such
regulators and supervisors can find the best connectivity to areas currently not covered as
ways to engage with industry on an ongoing well as the increase in quality of the current
basis to identify emerging challenges network coverage is key to the proliferation of
early and find the best solutions quickly in DFS. Formal collaboration between the DFS
conjunction with the market actors. It is of great regulators, the National Communications
importance that this dialogue be perceived Authority and the Ghana Investment Fund
as inclusive and free of bias in incorporating for Electronic Communications is therefore
the growing range of actors involved in the equally encouraged.
space. Similarly, it is important to establish
effective and regular collaboration between 1.2. Establish a digital task force in the
financial and non-financial regulators and Ministry of Finance focused on DFS
supervisors on relevant topics, as well as
within the Government of Ghana itself. In order to ensure implementation and buy-
in of the Action Points in this strategy, and
In addition, there should be formal to promote a broad range of digital financial
collaboration between all DFS regulators products and services (e.g., insurance,
through existing collaboration structures credit, and savings), a digital task force
such as the Payments Council, as set up by focused on DFS will be created within the
the Payment Systems and Services Act 2019 Ministry of Finance. The mandate of the
(PSSA), and the Technical Committee for the task force would be to work closely with a
NFIDS. The Payment Council is currently similar taskforce in DFS-facing regulators
focused only on the stakeholders in payment (i.e. Bank of Ghana, NITA, NPRA, NIC) to
ecosystem, while the Technical Committee evaluate issues in the DFS landscape and
for NFIDS already includes the regulators make recommendations on actions to their
for investment, pensions and insurance, respective entities. This task force shall also
but its primary focus is financial inclusion. be tasked with increasing awareness of and
In order not to duplicate efforts, either the capacity in DFS in the Ministry itself, and
mandate of the Payments Council could be lead the charge, particularly in the complete
expanded to other digital products such as digitization of government payments (see
insurance, investments, savings and loans, Action Area 6) and will also look at market-
or the Technical Committee could broaden wide topics like level playing field issues.
its scope to all of DFS.
Photo Credit: Jonathan Ernst , 2006

ACTION AREA 2: Enabling regulation of the EMI Guidelines, as well as ensure the
regulation of certain FinTech firms. Following
Ghana is on the right trajectory to render its the passage of PSSA Act 987, the Bank of
regulatory framework for digital payments Ghana will issue clarifying regulations on
enabling, even though further actions are issues such as applicable services and
required to unlock the full potential of a broader institutions, licensing requirements and
range of DFS: procedure, technology standards etc.
2.1. Implement the Payment Systems and 2.2. Expand the risk-based approach to
Services Act and issue clarifying regulations. KYC to all basic transaction accounts in an
equivalent manner
The Guidelines for E-Money Issuers in
Ghana17 (EMI Guidelines) and the Agent The EMI Guidelines adopt a risk-based
Guidelines18 both came into effect in July approach to Know-Your-Customer (KYC)
2015 in order to address some pitfalls of for e-money accounts. There is, however,
the 2008 Branchless Banking Guidelines. no tiered KYC currently for bank accounts.
The EMI Guidelines allow duly licensed non- As set out in the NFIDS, to advance
bank entities (such as subsidiaries of MNOs) financial inclusion it is necessary to enable
to issue electronic money (e-money), and deposit-taking institutions to offer basic
mandates e-money issuers (EMIs) to pass- transactional accounts – with lower balance
through not less than 80% of the interest and transaction limits. This is sustainable
accrued on the pooled e-money float net of and effective only if a tiered, simplified
any fees or administrative costs to e-money KYC regime can apply to these products,
holders. Receiving interest on the value stored similarly to e-money. This would require
is an incentive for mobile money customers to the Bank of Ghana to update the relevant
keep funds in the system instead of cashing circular20 concerning KYC for individuals
out, with significant, positive implications19 to implement the Financial Action Task
for financial inclusion and the evolution of Force (FATF) 2012 International Standards
the mobile money business model. The on Combating Money Laundering and the
Agent Guidelines require both EMIs and Financing of Terrorism & Proliferation.21 This
regulated financial institutions to obtain an action would fix the gaps in the three-tiered
authorisation for agency business, and sets KYC approach until the biometric national ID
out agent eligibility, agent due diligence and is rolled out in full.
permissible activities for agents.
2.3. Create a strategy for consumer protection
The PSSA Act 987 merges the current for financial services.
Payment System Act 2003 and extends
the regulatory framework to cover a variety Financial consumer protection regulation
of payment services that have not yet should at a minimum ensure that customers:
been regulated, including provision of (i) receive information to allow them to make
technological services to facilitate switching, informed decisions, (ii) are not subject to
routing, clearing, and data management, unfair or deceptive practices, and (iii) have
and the facilitation of interoperability of access to recourse mechanisms to resolve
payment systems and services among disputes. This protection should extend to
payment systems providers. The PSSA is all retail financial services and products,
particularly important as it will hasten the full irrespective of the type of provider of those
implementation of the licensing provisions services and products.
Although Ghana does not have national As the number of DFS providers expands,
consumer protection legislation, Bank of there is a risk of increased complaints and
Ghana has already gone some way to achieve fraud, and customer trust in DFS will decline
consumer protection for financial services. if these are not properly dealt with. Although
In February 2017, the Bank of Ghana issued the Bank of Ghana is taking a product-
both the Consumer Recourse Guidelines specific approach to consumer protection to
for Financial Service Providers22 (FSPs) and ensure it covers the specificities of each type
the Disclosure Rules for Credit Products.23 of product, all types of financial services,
Both rules are aimed at bolstering consumer including DFS, must be ultimately covered.
protection in the financial services sphere, As the Bank of Ghana has limited resources,
the Consumer Recourse Guidelines for FSPs the areas posing the most risks to individuals
providing a redress mechanism for customer should be prioritized in this process.
complaints regarding all types of financial
services, and the Disclosure Rules providing Rather than adopting a piece-meal
for specific disclosure obligations of credit approach to regulation, (e.g. passing DFS-
providers. Although technically in force, specific consumer protection), the Bank of
neither rule has been fully implemented and Ghana should first undertake a gap analysis
there are still gaps in these regulations, such of the existing regulatory framework for
as the lack of specific enforcement measures consumer protection to identify specific
and a lack of clarity of the application of the actions required to create a more consistent
Consumer Recourse Guidelines for FSPs to and harmonized framework. Based on this
all payment service providers. Therefore, analysis, it should develop a strategy for the
enforcement remains a challenge for both creation of an overall consumer protection
sets of rules. framework for all financial services, possibly
by issuing specific regulations covering
It is an urgent priority that these recourse and each type of product - e.g. credit, savings
disclosure rules be implemented as soon as and payments - separately, and including
possible once the gaps, including the lack specific guidelines for DFS channels in each
of enforcement measures, are remedied, regulation. In the spirit of consolidation,
to ensure a strong legal, regulatory and articles in the PSSA that speak to consumer
supervisory framework for consumer protection should also be addressed in more
protection. detail and included in the relevant regulation
by product.
In addition to the Consumer Recourse
Guidelines for FSPs and the Disclosure Rules Other sector regulators such as the National
for Credit Products, the Bank of Ghana is Insurance Commission and the Securities
currently also working on an array of further and Exchange Commission should
consumer protection regulations, including a undertake a similar exercise for DFS falling
DFS-specific consumer protection regulation under their jurisdiction.
as well as similar regulations for savings and
current accounts and investment products. 2.4. Ensure deposit protection for individual
There is also a need to strengthen the e-money accounts
enforcement of lender obligations to credit
bureaus to prevent negative reporting The Deposit Protection Act was passed by
and bolster quality of information. This is Parliament in 2016, establishing a Deposit
necessary to ensure consumer protection Corporation and introducing deposit
and eliminate barriers to accessing service. insurance. The Deposit Corporation is still in
institution-building mode, and enforcement demand for financial services such as credit,
of the Act is still a challenge. In addition, even savings, and insurance.
if the bank accounts in which an e-money
issuer’s e-float is held is covered by the Current market dynamics concerning data
Deposit Protection Act, it is not clear if this disadvantage new entrants, given that data
protection passes on to individual e-money is key to the business models of FinTech DFS
account holders through the concept of providers. Several super-platforms currently
beneficial trusts, given the coverage limits. control some types of this data, such as social
media, while banks and telecommunication
The Deposit Corporation should, as a priority, companies each proprietarily possess and
put in place the basics for deposit protection. control their customer data. New entrants
Secondly, the Deposit Corporation should who do not have internal access to this data
issue secondary legislation to clarify how are clearly at a disadvantage.
e-money accounts of individual e-money
account holders are protected by deposit Mandating some sort of data-sharing or
insurance. data portability would equilibrate the market,
based on the concept that the individual is
2.5. Introduce interventions to ensure the considered the owner of their data, as is
uptake of digital insurance service the basis of the Data Protection Act 2012.
In particular, the Government of Ghana
Given the important role that insurance would support the introduction of a limited
plays in minimizing financial shocks, and the data-sharing regulation between data
fact that digital insurance is well-placed to controllers (banks, MNOs, EMIs, social
increase uptake of insurance products by the media platforms) and other appropriately
mass market, the regulators should create a regulated DFS stakeholders, such as
micro-insurance underwriting license that FinTechs, based on the provision of explicit
allows qualified insurance intermediaries. user consent and the acceptance of strong
This will create an appropriate category customer security requirements. The data
and requirements for underwriting micro accessed under this regulation would
insurance policies, without holding providers be strictly limited to what is required for
to the same requirements as traditional the service the user has requested. The
insurance underwriters. In addition, regulation will set out technical standards
Government should transfer the authority and security requirements for APIs as well
over private health insurance from the as requirements for customer consent and
National Health Insurance Authority to the strong customer security.
National Insurance Commission to allow for
combined life/health policies. This action point will require strong support
from the Ministry of Communications and the
2.6. Introduce regulations governing the use Bank of Ghana in order to ensure acceptance
and sharing of DFS user data by other stakeholders, such as banks, EMIs
and MNOs.
DFS providers are employing data analytics
to develop alternative credit profiles using 2.7. Introduce a national competition law and
(i) records of clients’ electronic transactions authority
and telecommunications or social media
behaviour as well as (ii) digitizing paper- The primary regulator of DFS in Ghana is
based transaction data to identify potential the Bank of Ghana. However, given that
these services are usually transmitted anticompetitive practices such exclusionary
over telecommunications networks, there behaviour. An independent competition
are certain areas where the National authority is best placed to arbitrate such ex
Communications Authority has concurrent post issues, as it has market-wide jurisdiction
or exclusive jurisdiction in regards to certain and so may be able to enforce certain
DFS issues, such as access to and pricing of competition-relevant policies in DFS more
the USSD and other communication (bearer) broadly and across more different types of
channels, SIM registration and the primary providers than the individual sector-specific
regulation of MNOs that are currently regulators. Further, a competition authority is
undertaking DFS activities. The Bank of perhaps best placed to review and assess
Ghana and the National Communications certain structural market changes, such as
Authority are each responsible for their mergers and acquisitions, given its cross-
sector-specific regulations, and thus for the industry and economic expertise.
imposition of ex ante remedies for breach of
these regulations. Currently this includes, to Although increasing the sector-specific
a certain extent, market conduct rules but institutional and jurisdictional capacity of
only in regard to their regulated entities. the DFS regulators in regard to competition
matters is a short-term action point (see
From a competition policy perspective, DFS Action Area 3 below), in the long term a
markets implicate at least two industries – national competition law should be passed,
financial services and telecommunications and a national authority be created, to best
- whose characteristics (significant fixed monitor competition issues in DFS markets
costs and sunk investments, economies and enforce any required sanctions and
of scale and scope, essential facilities and remedies.
network effects) make the sector more
prone to market concentration and potential
Photo Credit: EIFL - Knowledge without boundaries, 2015

ACTION AREA 3: Capacity Building 3.2. All DFS providers to submit compliance
reports digitally
An enlarged, digital-first DFS ecosystem will
bring challenges to the financial sector regulators In order for the Bank of Ghana, the National
due to enhanced transaction volumes as well as Insurance Commission and the Securities
an augmented number of ecosystem players, and Exchange Commission to ensure
which will require a series of actions to increase effective implementation of the existing
capacity: regulatory regimes, each DFS provider
should submit regular electronic reports on
3.1. Ensure that BoG and other financial a variety of DFS-related indicators, such as
regulators have sufficient capacity and quality of service, agent activity, transaction
resources to effectively supervise the DFS volumes, complaints, and fraud. This will
space, particularly with competition matters allow each regulator to have a more global
view of the DFS-specific products under
There exists no national competition law, and their jurisdiction and enable each to take
The Protection Against Unfair Competition more risk-based regulatory and supervisory
Action Act 2000 contains solely provisions approaches to these products. Equally,
on acts of unfair competition closely related this information should be part of an overall
to intellectual property, such as confusion effective, regular consultative process
to a trademark or dilution of goodwill of between regulators and their regulated
a competitor. Anti-competitive market entities.
behaviour is thus approached by the Bank
of Ghana strictly as a market conduct issue, 3.3. Increase the technical capacity of the
which is an insufficient framework for complex Data Protection Commission in regard to DFS
and concentrated DFS markets. This lack of data, facilitate its cooperation with financial
a framework in particular may affect new supervisors and evaluate the need for
entrants’ ability to enter these markets and additional measures with regard to alternative
compete effectively with established players. DFS data
As the introduction of a national competition Although the Data Protection Act was passed
law and authority is a long and uncertain in 2012, the Data Protection Commission
process, the strengthening of the institutional (DPC) has only been recently established
and jurisdictional capacity of the Bank of and thus is still focused on institution building,
Ghana, the National Insurance Commission, having just started the registration process
and the Securities and Exchange for data controllers. There has concurrently
Commission in regard to competition been limited cooperation with the financial
matters for institutions offering DFS under supervisors and the telco regulator. As a
their jurisdiction should be the first priority. result, very few financial services providers
This can be done through capacity building have been registered as data controllers, let
as well as the signature of Memoranda alone DFS providers. Until the registration
of Understanding between regulators on process has been completed, the DPC is
jurisdictional competence. not in a position to take any action to enforce
the law.
In regard to financial services, data privacy Supervision department to effectively
and data security are particularly important oversee the marketplace is challenged
in order to ensure the security of customers’ as a result of (i) the rapid growth in the
personal and financial information, and to number and diversity of DFS providers and
prevent identity fraud. Further, both traditional channels; (ii) the increased volume of data
transaction data and alternative data, such and transactions; and (iii) the inadequacy of
as telecom and social media data, are at the the tools available to the supervisors.
core of the business models of most new
entrants in the DFS space, while established Likewise, the Financial Stability department,
players are learning the importance of the which is responsible for the supervision
data they already collect for cross-selling of banks and non-bank deposit-taking
and customer targeting purposes. There are institutions as well as for consumer protection
clearly DFS-specific risks that will need to be over all banking and payment products, may
addressed by data protection framework. soon face the challenge of monitoring new
digital-first or digital-only credit products, and
The DPC requires additional resources to of implementing market conduct supervision
successfully drive the registration process with millions of users that transact through
to its conclusion. The technical capacity of digital channels.
the DPC should be increased with training
in regard to the specificities of the data Similarly, other DFS regulators such as
created and used in the DFS ecosystem. the National Insurance Commission and
Further, cooperation between the DPC, the Securities and Exchange Commission
the financial supervisors (Bank of Ghana, see the markets under their jurisdiction
National Insurance Commission, and expanding rapidly. Furthermore, as the
National Health Insurance Authority) and the DFS markets open up to new players and
National Communications Authority should offer an ever-increasing variety of services,
be facilitated to coordinate the registration it becomes even more important to ensure
of DFS providers, and if required, the that all relevant DFS data is being collected
enforcement of their data protection (see Action Point 2 above) and to monitor
obligations. The signing of an MOU is competition dynamics to ensure a level
recommended to formalize this cooperation, playing field for all players.
and to clarify enforcement and supervisory
mandates. Lastly, as the Data Protection There is potential for RegTech solutions
Act 2012 does not specifically address to help financial authorities improve the
the use of alternative data in the financial efficiency and effectiveness of oversight
sector, it should be evaluated to determine and compliance vis-a-vis an increasingly
if additional regulations and measures with complex and data intensive marketplace.
regards to alternative data are required. This is important because these solutions can
streamline processes both for the supervisory
3.4. Design a RegTech strategy across authorities as well as the supervised entities
regulators and generate use-case specific intelligence
that strengthen supervision and policy
The PSSA includes explicit provisions giving development. RegTech solutions can be
the Bank of Ghana the mandate to carry out used for multiple supervisory purposes,
the oversight function over payment service including a better understanding of the
providers and payment system operators. resilience of the DFS ecosystem, anti-money
However, the capacity of the Payments laundering (AML)/counter financing of
terrorism (CFT) supervision, fraud detection, value as well as what pursuing such a
competition monitoring and customer strategy would require in terms of capacity,
protection. cost, and risk. Some of these solutions
are particularly relevant to improving the
The Bank of Ghana should develop a efficiency of the Government to properly
RegTech strategy identifying whether and design and implement programs that digitize
how various RegTech solutions could add payments and transfers (see Action Area 5).
Photo Credit: Adam Jones, Ph.D., 2010

Photo Credit: Fiona Graham, 2016

ACTION AREA 4: Market infrastructure employment records, financial histories, and
other personal confidential information.
Although Ghana has legacy financial
infrastructure that is crucial to the adoption of 4.2. Upgrade the Ghana E-Payment Portal
DFS and to ensuring that digital value remains (GEPP) platform’s payment and service
in the payment ecosystem, there are a series capability, through the digital automation
of actions that will be required to optimize this of forms and processes, the development
infrastructure and to lay the foundation for a new of USSD and app-based access for certain
and innovative digital financial infrastructure services, the creation of open APIs and the
stack: re-engineering of current internal processes
4.1. Establish the biometric centralized Launched in 2014, the GEPP provides critical
National ID system and enable payments and back-end infrastructure to enable online
other use cases through e-KYC payments for government services. The
National Information Technology Agency
(NITA) has the primary responsibility for
The National Identification Authority (NIA) is upgrading the GEPP platform.
currently rolling out a national biometric ID.
This should be coupled with the availability Although the GEPP platform has further
of online verification of the national biometric room for development and improvement as
ID for service providers in order to prevent highlighted in the recent BTCA diagnostic,
the use of fraudulent IDs. it is a key piece of Ghana’s payment
infrastructure that can be strengthened
As set out in Action Area 2, this ID can be through further investment in terms of
used for e-KYC and thus to facilitate remote resources, policy direction, and capacity.
or non face-to-face account activation. It
should be noted, however, that a digitally In particular, the citizen’s application forms
enabled ID system can also unlock further for services as well as the entire request
payments and financial service use cases. process should be digitally automated, and
For instance, if coupled with real-time push once built, access should be given to all
payments which are available through participating Ministries, Departments and
GhIPSS Instant Payment and a virtual Agencies (MDAs) to a citizen’s “digital locker”
payment addressing system (see Action to facilitate the exchange of information
Point 4.6 below), the payments addressing required for the delivery of certain services.
layer can enable real-time funds transfer Further, certain services that do not require
using ID numbers, phone numbers, email any digital upload or complicated data
addresses, or other identifiers instead entry, such as a driver’s license renewal,
of account details, which has numerous should be accessible via USSD as well,
advantages including greater security, to take into account the citizens without
flexibility, and competition. Integration of the access to internet. Concurrently, the GEPP
biometric ID with credit reference bureaus can should create open APIs to incentivize
resolve issues that often arise with uniquely the connection of the GEPP to third party
identifying borrowers and which undermine payment platforms and integrators. To
the quality of the data considerably, holding optimize all these actions, a re-engineering
back lending. Biometric IDs can also enable of the current internal processes is required.
data and document portability for customers Further, certain products such as digital
if coupled with appropriate regulation and insurance require access to data on public
“digital lockers” for birth, marriage and hospital admissions as well as registered
deaths.
4.3. Ensure effective interoperability between payment addressing system that links a
bank and mobile payments, including citizen’s bank account to a virtual payment
the development of a clear and neutral address such as the national ID number and
governance structure for the integration of phone number, thus enabling the routing of
mobile payments into the national switch payments to individuals; and (iii) a digital
locker for storage of individual data that can
Ghana’s national switch is managed by be shared with financial service providers
GhIPSS and handles the electronic clearing upon consent as well as providing a secure
of cheques and the processing and and virtual space into which government
settlement of bulk debit and credit transfers agencies can issue official documents.
between banks. The switch will soon be This infrastructure stack has enabled both
technically interoperable with other types financial inclusion and digital payments
of payments such as bank-to-mobile wallet, to increase rapidly in India. In particular, it
mobile wallet-to-bank, and mobile wallet-to- has enabled e-KYC, allowing anyone with a
mobile wallet transactions. biometric ID to open an account instantly at
any customer service point in a paperless
In order to ensure effective interoperability manner. Further, it has simplified payments
between bank and mobile payment, there throughout the ecosystem, as money can
should be a clear and neutral governance be sent to anyone simply by using a virtual
structure for the integration of mobile payment address or their bank account
payments into the national switch. This details. Equally, it has enabled access to
structure should include rules concerning more sophisticated DFS such as loans, both
liability, fraud, dispute settlement, and due to the transactional data generated
consumer protection, and thus create a from the payments as well as the seamless
level playing field so that all ecosystem ability to store and share other data. Lastly,
stakeholders participate and connect to this the digital locker in particular allows for the
switch. This can be achieved by allowing the decentralization of data in individual cloud-
market to negotiate key commercial terms based accounts, which decreases the
within a general enabling framework, rather risk of cyber hacks and could result in the
than forcing compliance through a regulatory optimization of credit bureaus and collateral
mandate. Thus, although GhIPSS can registries if these are plugged into the
provide guidance on interchange pricing for market infrastructure to enhance their utility
the national switch, with a focus on minimal and efficiency.
pricing for low-value transactions, it should
ultimately allow market forces to determine Ghana is facing similar issues to India in
pricing. relation to financial inclusion and digital
payments. As the Bank of Ghana and
4.4. Complete a diagnostic of Ghana’s the National Identification Authority have
payments infrastructure to assess missing already started work on critical elements
elements of a digital infrastructure stack and of such a stack, such as payment services
develop an implementation strategy. interoperability and a national biometric ID,
Ghana is in a position to extract several
India has developed a digital financial lessons from the implementation of the
infrastructure stack which has three layers digital financial infrastructure stack in India,
of infrastructure: (i) a biometric ID database, including the possible creation of a similar
from which each citizen is issued a unique digital financial infrastructure stack.
ID number (termed Aadhaar); (ii) a virtual
The development of a purpose-built The Government will then jointly with the
infrastructure stack could result in (i) the providers consider options for expanding
simplification of payments and KYC for the reach of those networks so as to increase
citizens, and (ii) the unlocking of further DFS access and ease the path towards national
use cases. In order to assess where the financial inclusion objectives. Such options
current gaps are in Ghana’s infrastructure might include time-bound subsidies for
and capacity, a diagnostic should be establishing access points in challenging
undertaken. Concurrently, there should be areas, perhaps through a universal service
extensive engagement with the stakeholders access fund similar to the role GIFEC plays for
so as to guide the development and the GSM communications network. It could
implementation process and their intended also include provider incentives such as
outcomes. This diagnostic and the results coverage bonuses, minimum requirements,
from the shareholder engagement should be or some combination of both.
the basis for an implementation strategy.
4.6. Implement a digital financial infrastructure
4.5. Monitor the coverage levels of cash-in/ stack through the creation of a virtual payment
cash-out networks and explore potential addressing system, a payment bridge and a
models for encouraging their expansion to governance structure
underserved areas
The implementation of the digital financial
Given the importance of cash-in/cash-out infrastructure stack - the virtual payment
networks-notably mobile money agents- addressing system, the payments bridge,
in enabling customers to access and use and the governance structure – will require
digital financial services, ensuring the long-term planning and resource allocation,
broadest possible coverage nationwide is an as such a project requires significant capital
important policy objective for the Government resources as well as the prior implementation
in support of the NFIDS. The coverage and of a biometric ID and a fully interoperable
quality of these networks will therefore be payment system. Equally the project will
monitored by the Bank of Ghana and the require buy-in from several regulators,
Government will explore potential avenues including the Bank of Ghana, the National
to encourage their expansion into excluded Identification Authority, and the National
and underserved areas as needed. Information Technology Agency and other
state entities such as GhIPSS, as well as
Monitoring will take place through the agent support from the private sector.
database being established by the Bank
of Ghana, into which e-money issuers are
required to report location data for their cash-
in/cash-out points. This will offer a continually
updated view on the level of physical access
to cash-in/cash-out networks in different
parts of the country. On that basis, the
Ministry in consultation with the stakeholders
will establish an appropriate and realistic
target commensurate with the goals in the
overarching financial inclusion strategy.
Photo Credit: John O’Bryan, 2015

ACTION AREA 5: Digital payment use cases However, there is still a lot of work to be
done in order for digital small-value P2G to
As highlighted in the country digital payment become ubiquitous.
diagnostic, cash payments dominate the
majority of transactions for most stakeholders. The Government intends to move to digital
The digitization of payments can drive DFS payments exclusively for government fees
by building a comprehensive ecosystem and and fines, and to leverage GEPP as the central
increasing the value proposition of DFS overall. payment infrastructure for MDAs, while
Moreover, once a significant number of citizens promoting greater choice and competition.
are on-boarded, a tipping point towards a cash- In order to achieve this, in addition to the
lite economy can be achieved. Indeed, the Ghana various measures set out to upgrade the
Digital Payments Roadmap to be launched by GEPP set out in Action Area 3 above, the
MoF along with this policy, identifies key actions Ministry will undertake an audit of available
and initiatives that will leverage existing strengths Government services whose payments
and opportunities in the Ghanaian payments have not been digitized, to determine their
ecosystem to implement projects with potential priority in MDA integration, given its limited
for high impact effective digital transformation. resources. Once the prioritized MDAs are
Whereas the roadmap serves as a more detailed identified, the Government can provide
implementation plan with actions for both public support to improve the technical capacity
and private sector, this policy looks at the steps of these prioritized MDAs as well as current
that government can take to drive this initiative. In GEPP participating MDAs to migrate to
light of this, with the limited nature of the Ministry’s digital payments.
resources and capacity, the Ministry should
drive citizen adoption of DFS payment use cases Second, as the current transaction fee levied
that (i) have the most beneficial impact on the on the GEPP may be a barrier to adoption, the
population; (ii) are characterized by habitual and Ministry of Finance, with inputs as relevant
frequent expenditures for essential services; and from the Ministry of Communications, will
(iii) are likely to increase living standards across negotiate with FSPs to lower costs or even
all strata of the population. These include: offer discounts for digital payments through
the GEPP to incentivize citizens to pay
5.1. Support the digitization of small-value electronically. Third, the Government will
Person-to-Government (P2G) payments undertake a public awareness campaign of
the GEPP and digital P2G payments.
The digitization of small-value P2G payments
such as fees and fines offers convenience to Government’s short-term objective is to
citizens. This will improve revenue collection expand the number of available, frequently
and reduce rent-seeking behaviour as no used and essential P2G services on the GEPP
face-to-face interaction will be required. platform, to lower the cost of usage of digital
Even more importantly, the Government can payments and to raise public awareness, in
strongly lead by example in digitizing these order to incentivize public use.
payments.
5.2. Incentivize and support digital payments
The difficult work of building a central in the retail space
e-services and e-payments portal and on-
boarding most of the payment providers has According to the recent country payment
been already undertaken by GEPP and the diagnostic, 99.9% of payments for
National Information Technology Agency. consumption goods by volume are in cash,
and these make up 94% of all payments These incentives may take various forms,
by volume. Digitizing these payments is from lowering VAT on purchases up to a
therefore the most effective way to reduce given threshold made with digital payments,
the overall use of cash in the economy and to lower deemed profit tax rates of merchants
thereby bring down the substantial costs and other businesses for amounts received
incurred by the Government as well as by through banks and digital channels and
businesses from cash production, handling, customer income tax rebates for an annual
transport, safekeeping and destruction. expenditure report on payments made by
digital means. It could also include directly
Furthermore, digitizing even a small number paying the merchant fee for small-value
of these transactions will not only substantially purchases, like India has recently started
increase citizens’ participation in the digital doing.24
payment ecosystem, it will also open up new
paths for access to capital and insurance for These measures will be supported by
small businesses that are typically excluded other efforts to support digital payments in
from formal financial services. Lastly, as retail. One is to encourage interoperability
women make up a large proportion of those and standardization across providers in
selling retail goods, digitization in this area terms of technical standards, pricing, user
will also directly improve their businesses experience, liability and recourse rules, etc.
and personal security as well as offer further in order to facilitate adoption. Another is an
economic opportunities. awareness campaign targeting customers
as well as merchants on the usage and
Although digitization of retail payments benefits of digital payments, in order to
requires a concerted, collective industry counter any lack of trust in digital payments
effort and engagement from all players of and the fact that such services are not yet
the value chain, Government support is also broadly perceived to be convenient.
important. Recognizing that tax concerns
related to formalization is a significant 5.3. Support the digitization of public utility
obstacle to adoption of digital payments by payments
many small businesses, the Ministry commits
to placing a moratorium on the use of digital The digitization of the payment of public
payments data for tax assessments for the utilities such as water and electricity is
duration of this strategy and to consider the particularly important. This is particularly
question once more at the end of it. so due to the large amount of cash
(99.84%)2 that is currently being used for
Furthermore, the Ministry will encourage these payments, the sizeable impact that
merchants and other payment acceptors digitization of such payments would have on
(e.g., billers, farmers) and this will encourage the population (80% of the population uses
the use of digital payments. In particular, at least one, if not both, of these services)
it will offer tax incentives (i) to Fast Moving and the Government’s role as ultimate
Consumer Goods (FMCG) companies shareholder in these utility companies. In
that successfully shift merchant payments the case of off-grid electricity, access to
to electronic through trade discounts; (ii) such energy via digital payment provides
to financial service providers (FSPs) that a tangible incentive for users to register for
support the roll-out of electronic merchant and actively use many other digital payment
payments; and (iii) to retailers and individuals services, such as a mobile money account.
that actively adopt electronic payments. The digitization of on-grid utility payments,
especially if they enable end-to-end digital 5.5. Digitize NHIS premiums and their payment
distribution through smart meters, would also on a monthly basis
provide an entry point to a large segment of
the financially excluded and enable them to Premiums to the National Health Insurance
access a variety of formal financial services. Scheme (NHIS) are currently paid in a
yearly lump sum in cash. Digitizing these
To support this digitization, the Government payments, and enabling monthly payments,
will provide financial and technical support will make it easier for the non-exempt
to public utility companies to update their individuals to afford the scheme as well as
internal accounting processes, including render payments more convenient. As the
their accounting/reconciliation software/ entire population is eligible for registration to
platforms, in order to solve issues arising with the NHIS and registration brings important
reconciliation and fragmented databases. health benefits, these payments are a
Secondly, it will deliver technical support good entry point into the digital payments
to assist public utilities which have not yet ecosystem for a significant proportion of
rolled out digital payments (e.g. electricity, currently financially excluded individuals.
sanitation) in crafting effective partnerships
with FSPs to implement the acceptance of 5.6. Authorize reception and payment of
digital payments both for prepaid and post- international remittances directly by e-money
paid utilities, and particularly for existing issuers
smart meters.
World Bank study in 2018, showed Ghana
5.4. Digitize pension contributions and received US$ 3.8 billion in remittances.25
distributions for the informal sector Currently the fees for international
remittances can be significant, especially
Approximately 60% of the population works in regard to low-value transfers, and most
in the informal sector, many of whom are of these funds are immediately cashed out,
financially excluded. The Government and thus taken out of the digital payments
revealed in its 2018 Budget the development ecosystem. Beneficiaries of international
of an Informal Sector Pension Scheme under remittances should have a variety of low-cost
the third tier of the National Pension Scheme options to receive funds directly into their
which will be first piloted in the Cocoa sector. mobile wallets instead of over the counter.
The scheme can complement the efforts of Terminating remittances digitally ensures
private sector corporate trustees. that funds remain in the DFS ecosystem and
provides an entryway to other digital-based
Given the high number of individuals who financial services.
are financially excluded in the informal
sector, the scheme should focus on using Currently only money transfer operators and
digital payment both to accept contribution banks are authorised to undertake such
payments and disburse pension payments. an activity, so any digital payment solution
A national state pension scheme for informal requires a partnership and includes the high
workers that leverages digital payment would transfer fees charged by these organisations.
provide social protection to these citizens in EMIs and other digital payment providers
their elderly years, bring informal workers could directly offer this service at very low
into the digital payments ecosystem, and rates if authorized. Such lower transaction
incentivize the adoption of other DFS, such fees may incentivize individuals to switch
as savings and credit. from informal money transfer methods,
funnelling funds into the formal payments intersection of digitalization and lending. As
ecosystem. government continues to explore innovative
ways to drive lending to the agricultural sector
5.7. Support the digitization of agriculture especially smallholder farmers, digital credit
value chain payments presents a viable opportunity to achieve that
objective. The constraints associated with
The agricultural sector in Ghana has using traditional lending models to assess
challenges with fragmentation, lack of smallholder farmers, often do not apply to
transparency, inefficiency and lack of digital credit. This policy therefore presents
coordination. Digitization of the sector’s an opportunity to appropriately assess
activities can address some of these smallholder farmers and extend credit to
challenges by introducing transparency, them as well as other actors in the value
improving efficiency and reducing risk. chain.
With several examples of successful
agricultural payment digitization initiatives 5.8. Subsidize the purchase and installation
in Ghana, government has an opportunity of homogeneous smart meters for electricity
to replicate that success across the entire and water
sector through policy. Such efforts must go
beyond the priority value chains such as Although the digitization of payment for post-
cocoa, which have been structured under paid public utilities will save customers the
the administrative board. time required to pay a bill as well as result in
savings and revenue for the utility, it will only
Government’s effort can include a directive provide an incremental benefit to the parties,
to buyers in selected value chains to pay as there is no end-to-end digital distribution
all farmers digitally. This directive can of the service. Achieving public utility end-to-
subsequently be scaled to other value chains. end digital payment and delivery of services
There is significant momentum towards will reduce significantly a customer’s overall
digitization of farmer payments within the transaction costs in obtaining the services,
cocoa sector, both driven by industry and the as well as eliminate payment delinquencies
COCOBOD which is the government body for the public utility.
overseeing the value chain. Several licensed
buying companies (LBCs) are piloting digital The solution for end-to-end digital payment
farmer payments (both using e-zwich cards and distribution is the smart prepaid meter,
and mobile money) while COCOBOD is also which allows for remote meter reading and
committed to shifting to digital disbursement crediting via digital payment means such
for all their subsidies. A government directive as mobile money. Currently there are no
on shifting payment away from cash would smart water meters, and only 20% of post-
have a significant impact on accelerating this paid electricity meters are smart (of which
trend, have significant benefits for the farmer there seem to be many different meters that
and drive financial inclusion in rural areas. require different communication protocols).
Though there is most progress currently in As the roll-out of smart meters is a significant
cocoa, the government directive should capital investment for public utilities, the
cover all value chains in order to expand the Government plans, in the long term, to
ecosystem for DFS. subsidize the purchase and installation of
homogeneous smart meters for electricity
In addition to stimulating payments, and water.
government should look closely at the
5.9. Roll-out of end-to-end delivery of It should be noted that this roll-out can
Government services be done either by centralizing all service
provision through the GEPP or by using the
In order to achieve full digitization of small- GEPP as the user interface and payment
value P2G payments, the main pain point tool and redirecting to the MDA websites for
of the citizens must be addressed – that service fulfilment. The digital automation of
obtaining a government service may require forms and process, the development of a
several trips to the relevant MDAs, and long digital locker for exchange of information,
waiting times when there. The roll-out of end- and the development of USSD access for
to-end delivery and payment of government certain services, as set out in Action Area 4,
services significantly reduces a citizen’s will create the building blocks required.
transaction costs and will be an important
accelerator for adoption. Therefore, the
Government’s long-term objective is to
ensure this end-to-end digital service
provision for its services.
Photo Credit: John O’Bryan, 2015

Photo Credit: Dominic Chavez, 2015

ACTION AREA 6: Support FinTech have been possible on the Ghana Revenue
Authority website, with digital payment via
FinTech firms are crucial actors in rendering the the GEPP platform.
DFS ecosystem competitive. With increasing
smartphone penetration and a regulatory There is, however, still much work to be
regime that is already embracing innovation in done to ensure a conducive environment
payments, the Ghanaian FinTech firms that are for FinTech start-ups in Ghana. As set
active in the payments space are already well out in Action Area 2, further reform and
placed to mobilize and grow. There are, however, legislation is required to ensure all FinTech
certain actions that can be taken to ensure a start-ups in DFS are competing in an open
more conducive environment for all FinTech and level ecosystem. Moreover, the current
firms in Ghana, which will create increasing tax measures seem ineffective in attracting
opportunities for DFS: investors, and the implementation of
NEIP, including its tax provisions, has only
6.1. Undertake an assessment of the policy commenced. There are also other legal and
environment in place for FinTech firms and regulatory measures which may be slowing
investors start-up growth, such as company, labour
and/or intellectual property regulation. It is
The Government is committed to supporting therefore an opportune moment to undertake
start-ups with its National Entrepreneurship an audit of all relevant measures to identify
and Innovation Plan (NEIP), which was concrete actions in the legal, regulatory and
presented in the 2017 budget and officially tax domains that may support start-ups and
launched in July 2017. It aims to provide investors.
integrated support to early stage (start-ups
and small) businesses, focusing on the 6.2. Assess the need of a regulatory sandbox
provision of business development services, for FinTech products
business incubators, and special funding for
youth-owned businesses. One of the biggest challenges many
FinTechs face is the pace at which their
In addition, the tax regime is generally sector regulators can assess and approve
enabling for investors and start-ups. Five- innovation. This has increased the need for
year tax exemptions in respect to corporate government to assess the need for regulatory
income tax, dividend tax and capital gains sandboxes. However, in order to avoid a
tax are available to investors, as well as the sprawl of sectoral sandboxes, government
carrying forward of losses from any such must pursue a harmonised approach for
investment post the exempt period up to 5 sandboxes.
years. The Government has also revealed in
its 2018 budget the granting of tax holidays, 6.3. Provide direct Government support for
under the NEIP, to young Ghanaian FinTech entrepreneurship
entrepreneurs of age 35 years and below
who start their own businesses, followed by In addition to implementing any
a preferential tax rate between 3 to 5 years recommendations that result from the audit,
after the tax holiday and the ability to carry there are specific direct measures the
forward losses for five years. Government can take to support FinTech
entrepreneurship.
Further, since 2016, online business
registration and other company services
First, within the framework of NEIP, specific 6.4. Privilege FinTech-based payment
innovation hubs that support young solutions for Government-to-Person and
entrepreneurs in Ghana’s FinTech industry Government-to-Business payments
should be developed. These hubs should
offer venture incubation, business and Many Government payments are already
skills development, and the fostering of digitized, as most Government-to-Person
multinational and global partnerships. This (G2P) payments are made by bank transfer
approach can also be replicated in other (e.g. salaries of civil servants and pensions)
national initiatives on entrepreneurship, and e-zwich (e.g., social transfers), while
employment and innovation. Second, Government-to-Business (G2B) and
Government should sponsor profile-raising Business-to-Government (B2G) payments
local and regional conferences and events are by cheque or EFT, and Person-to-
to support the local FinTech industry as Government (P2G) payments are mainly cash.
well as existing accelerators, incubators, The use of local FinTech solutions to facilitate
and common workspaces. Lastly these payments, however, is mostly absent.
Government should champion technology- The Ministry of Finance and other Ministries
and entrepreneurship-friendly curricula will proactively adopt FinTech solutions for
in universities and vocational schools to their own digital payments (both G2B and
help grow the next generation of FinTech G2P), both to harness the cost savings and
entrepreneurs. efficiency of digital payments and to serve as
a role model to citizens and businesses. This
These types of support measures will most roll-out could be coupled with a RegTech
likely be piloted by the NEIP, so the MoF solution to allow for the planning and
must ensure communication with the NEIP monitoring of G2P and G2B payments (see
to avoid duplication of efforts and to identify Action Area 3). These actions signal strong
specific areas for its action. support of innovation and FinTech.
Photo Credit: Startup inside, 2017

Annex 1: Timeline of Action Points
The timeframe for reaching the various milestones is outlined below:
Short-term action points (12-18 months):
AREA ACTION POINT
1 Strive for improved forms of dialogue between industry and the relevant regulators
and supervisors, and within the Government of Ghana itself
Establish a digital task force in the Ministry of Finance focused on DFS
2 Strengthen and fully implement the Consumer Recourse Guidelines and the
Disclosure Rules for Credit Products
Create a strategy for a consumer protection framework for financial services
Ensure deposit protection over individual e-money accounts
3 Ensure that BoG and other financial regulators have sufficient capacity and
resources to effectively supervise the DFS space
Require that all DFS providers to submit compliance reports digitally
Increase the technical capacity of the Data Protection Commission in DFS data
4 Facilitate DPC’s cooperation with financial supervisors and evaluate the need for
additional measures with regard to alternative DFS data
5 Establish the biometric centralized National ID system and enable payments and
other use cases though e-KYC
AREA ACTION POINT
Upgrade the Ghana E-Payment Portal (GEPP) platform’s payment and service delivery
capacity through the digital automation of forms and processes, the development of USSD
access for certain services, the creation of open APIs and the re-engineering of current
internal processes
Ensure effective interoperability between bank and mobile payments, including the
development of a clear and neutral governance structure for the integration of mobile
payments into the national switch
Undertake a diagnostic of Ghana’s current infrastructure to assess missing elements
of a digital payment infrastructure stack and develop a strategy for implementation,
accompanied by stakeholder engagement
Monitor the coverage levels of cash in/cash out-networks and explore potential models for
encouraging their expansion to underserved areas
6 Support the digitization of small-value P2G payments
Incentivize and support digital payments in the retail space
Support the digitization of public utility payments
7 Strengthen the enforcement of lender obligations to credit bureaus to prevent negative
reporting and bolster quality of information
8 Undertake an assessment of the policy environment in place for FinTech firms and
investors
Assess the need for a regulatory sandbox for FinTech products
Provide direct Government support for FinTech entrepreneurship
Privilege local FinTech-based payment solutions for Government to Person and
Government to Business payments
Medium-term action points (18-36 months):
AREA ACTION POINT
1 Strengthen the institutional and jurisdictional capacity of DFS regulators in regard to
competition matters
2 Introduce the digitization of pension contributions and distributions for the informal sector
Introduce the digitization of NHIS premiums and their payment on a monthly basis
Authorise the receipt and payment of international remittances by e-money issuers
Support the digitization of agriculture value chain payments
3 Support digital credit for the agricultural sector
Long term action points (>36 months):
AREA ACTION POINT
1 Introduce regulation governing data sharing among data collectors (banks, MNOs, EMIs,
social media platforms) and other appropriately regulated DFS stakeholders
Introduce a national competition law
2 Design a RegTech strategy across regulators
3 Implement a digital financial infrastructure stack through the creation of a virtual payment
addressing system, a payment bridge, and a governance structure
Further expand telecommunications connectivity
4 Subsidize the purchase and installation of homogeneous smart meters for water and
electricity
5 Create a micro-insurance underwriting license that allows qualified insurance
intermediaries
Transfer the authority over private health insurance from the National Health Insurance
Authority to the National Insurance Commission to allow for combined life/health policies
Photo Credit: Jonathan Ernst, 2006

Annex 2: NFIDS targets applicable
to DFS Policy
CATEGORY INDICATORS 2015 / 2016 2020 2023
FORMAL Ghana (adults) 58% 70% 85%
FINANCIAL
INCLUSION Women (adults) 57% 70% 85%
Rural (adults) 51% 65% 80%
Poorest quintile (adults) 41% 55% 70%
DIGITIZATION Registered Mobile Money Accounts (Million)26 19.7 34.0 36.0
OF PAYMENTS
Active Mobile Money Accounts (Million)27 8.3 14.0 17.0
PENSIONS Number of individuals with a Tier III Pension Plan28 148,882 289,744 349,465
Source: NFIDS
Photo Credit: Gunnar Salvarsson, 2014

Endnotes
1“Accelerating Regtech for Regulators”, accessed 9th June 2019,
2 “Country Diagnostic: Ghana”, Better Than Cash Org. 2017.
3 BTCA, 2016
4 Raman, A. 2017. India Government estimates, in a presentation titled “India Stack”, October 10, 2017.
5 “Direct Benefit Transfer”, Government of India. 2019. Accessed 25 June 2019,
6 Babatz, G. 2013. “Sustained Effort, Saving Billions: Lessons from the Mexican Government’s Shift to Electronic
Payments”. In Better Than Cash Alliance Evidence Paper: Mexico Study, 1st November 2013,
7 Lindert, K, Linder, A, Hobbs, J, & De la Briére, B. 2007. “The Nuts and Bolts of Brazil’s Bolsa Família Program:
Implementing Conditional Cash Transfers in a Decentralized Context.” World Bank Social Protection Working
Paper No.0709,
8 FII Ghana Survey 2014.
9 Financial technology is the new applications, processes, products, or business models in the financial
services industry, composed of one or more complementary financial services which are provided as an end-
to-end process via the Internet.
10 Figure is from 2014.
11 This figure is from 2014, but based on anecdotal industry data, it is still representative of the current position.
12 FII Ghana Survey 2014. “Savings” is defined as any safekeeping instrument, including formal instruments
(bank accounts, mobile money, MFI accounts) and informal instruments (in safe place, with other individuals).
13 FII Ghana Survey 2014.
14 FII Ghana Survey 2014. “Investment” is defined as any instrument which may bring a return, including
government bonds, company shareholdings, physical assets, and owning of own business.
15 FII Ghana Survey 2014.
16 This figure dates from 2017 and is an industry estimate.
17 Bank of Ghana, 2015. “Guidelines for E-money issuers in Ghana”.
18 Bank of Ghana, 2015. “Agent Guidelines”.
19 GSMA, 2014. “Should the interest accrued on the trust or escrow account be paid out to mobile money
customers?”.
20 Bank of Ghana, 2011. “Know Your Customer Policy”, 14th January 2011.
21 FATF, 2012-2018. “International Standards on Combatting Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism
& Proliferation, FATF, Paris, France.
22 Bank of Ghana, 2017. “Customer Recourse Mechanism Guidelines for Financial Service Providers”, 20th
February 2019.
23 Bank of Ghana, 2017. “Disclosure and Product Transparency Rules for Credit Products & Services”.
24 Times of India, 2017. “Government will bear merchant charge on debit card purchases up to Rs 2000”. TOI,
16th December 2017.
25 World Bank Group.
26 Data is from 2016.
27 Data is from 2016.
28 Data is from 2016.
Photo Credits: Buddy Buruku, 2020